# Bath study 2017

Two cash transfer simulations were modelled in Martinelli (2017a; 2017b): Full Scheme 1 and Full Scheme 2. Full Scheme 1 features cash transfers at the same level as existing benefits, with a withdrawal of the majority of child, employment, and retirement benefits. The new weekely payments modelled were £67.01 per dependent child, £73.10 per working age adult, and £155.60 for pensioners. These new transfers, coupled with the elimination of most existing benefits, resulted in a revenue shortfall of £143 billion. This shortfall was made up by eliminating the personal allowance, abolishing the lower and upper limit for National Insurance Contributions (NIC) so that the contribution is 12% of all income, and increasing the income tax rate by 4% in all income bands. This scheme increased working age poverty by 7%, increased child poverty by 1%, and caused 42% of households to experience a drop in disposible income. Full Scheme 2 followed a similar pattern of replacing existing benefits with cash transfers, with the addition of disability supplements. Disabled adults received an additional £35.75 per week, while disabled children received £59.45 per week. Severely disabled adults received an extra £76.65 per week on top of the disability supplement, while for severely disabled children, the additional payment was an extra £24.07. These added disability supplements resulted in a revenue shortfall of £184 billion. This gap in funding was bridged with similar steps as in Full Scheme 1, the difference being that the income tax was raised by 8% in all income bands instead of 4%. Full Scheme 2 proved to be more successful, reducing both working age and child poverty by between 14% and 15%. However, 44% of households would experience a drop in disposable income.

Partial schemes studied were Torry’s (2016a) Scheme β and Reed and Lansley’s (2016) Scheme 2. Scheme β featured a weekly £60 cash transfer to adults aged 25-64, £50 per week for ages 16-24, £30 a week for pensioners, and £20 per week for children. All previous benefits remained, with these cash transfers used in calculating means-tested benefits. The tax implications of this scheme required the elimination of the personal allowance, the standardization of NIC rates, and all tax bands going up 3%. Child poverty dropped 33%, adult poverty fell by 20%, and the disposable income losses for low income households were very limited. Scheme 2's weekley payments were £71 for adults 25-64, £61 for adults 16-24, £51 for pensioners, and £59 for children. All benefits remained as before, except for the removal of Child Benefit. The cash transfers were used in the recalculation of means-tested benefits. Similar to Scheme β, the personal allowance would have to be eliminated, NIC rates would have to be standardized, and all income tax bands would need to be raised, this time by 5%. After these measures, Scheme 2 would still carry a net cost of £8 billion. The results of this scheme were the fall of child poverty by 44%, the reduction of adult poverty by 14%, and a gain in disposable income for roughly three quarters of low-income households.
